First draft of 21.0.0.8-beta post (#1524)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2021-07-08-logging-format-21008-beta.adoc

---
layout: post

> title: "In Open Liberty 21.0.0.8-beta a number of new features and improvements including; new logging format (TBASIC), The Stale Connection Identification, MicroProfile Health 3.1, Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features and MicroProfile 4.1 improvements"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "In Open Liberty 21.0.0.8-beta: MicoProfile 4.1 with MicroProfile Health 3.1; a new logging format (TBASIC); Stale Connection Identification; and Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features"
```

Author: Done

# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/jakub-pomykala
author_github: https://github.com/jakub-pomykala

> seo-title: In Open Liberty 21.0.0.8-beta a number of new features and improvements including; new logging format (TBASIC), The Stale Connection Identification, MicroProfile Health 3.1, Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features and MicroProfile 4.1 improvements - OpenLiberty.io

Reviewer: same changes as main title

Author: Done

> seo-description: Open Liberty 21.0.0.8-beta brings a new logging format (`TBASIC`). The Stale Connection Identification makes it possible to provide additional congifuration for a data source, MicroProfile Health 3.1 now has unique APIs/endpoints, Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features are included in this beta release in the `all beta` zip file and MicroProfile 4.1 improves developer experience with updates to the Health feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-description: Open Liberty 21.0.0.8-beta introduces MicroProfile 4.1 with updates to the MicroProfile Health feature. A new logging format (`TBASIC`) is made available. The Stale Connection Identification feature makes it possible to provide additional configuration for a data source. A couple of Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features are also included in the `all beta` package.
```

Author: Done

> blog_description: Open Liberty 21.0.0.8-beta brings a new logging format (`TBASIC`). The Stale Connection Identification makes it possible to provide additional congifuration for a data source, MicroProfile Health 3.1 now has unique APIs/endpoints, Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features are included in this beta release in the `all beta` zip file and MicroProfile 4.1 improves developer experience with updates to the Health feature.

Reviewer: same changes as above

Author: Done

open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---

> = In Open Liberty 21.0.0.8-beta a number of new features and improvements including; new logging format (TBASIC), The Stale Connection Identification, MicroProfile Health 3.1, Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features and MicroProfile 4.1 improvements

Reviewer: Changes similar to the title above

Author: Done

We have one beta package for link:{url-about}[Open Liberty]:

* <<allbeta, All Beta Features>>: a larger package that contains all Open Liberty beta features (including Jakarta EE 9 beta features) and GA features and functions.

This means that you can now try out our in-development Open Liberty features by just adding the relevant coordinates to your build tools.

If you try this package, <<feedback, let us know what you think>>.
[#allbeta]
== All Beta Features package

The All Beta Features package includes the following beta features:

* <<mp, Microprofile Updates>>
** <<mp4.1, MicroProfile 4.1>>
** <<mpHealth3.1, MicroProfile Health 3.1>>
* <<tbasic, TBASIC Logging Format Beta>>
* <<staleConnectionID, Customizing Stale Connection Identification>>
* <<JEE9.1, Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features>>

[#mp]
=== Microprofile Updates

> In Open Liberty 21.0.0.8-beta we have two updates: MicroProfile 4.1 improves developer experience with updates to the Health feature and MicroProfile Health 3.1 enables you to provide your own health check procedures to be invoked by Open Liberty. Find out more below. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Open Liberty 21.0.0.8-beta we have two updates: MicroProfile 4.1 improves developer experience with updates to the Health feature; MicroProfile Health 3.1 enables you to provide your own health check procedures to be invoked by Open Liberty. Find out more below. 
```

Author: Done

[#mp4.1]
==== MicroProfile 4.1

MicroProfile 4.1 improves developer experience with updates to the Health feature. MicroProfile 4.1 also defines compatible implementation requirements for runtimes, which must pass all of the MicroProfile component specification `TCKs` including Config 2.0, Fault Tolerance 3.0, Rest Client 2.0, Health 3.1, Metrics 3.0, Open Tracing 2.0, Open API 2.0, and JWT propagation 1.2. This beta driver will be used as a compatible implementation for releasing MicroProfile 4.1.

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>microProfile-4.1</feature>
</featureManager>
----

> To find out more take a look at the link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile/releases/tag/4.1-RC1[MicroProfile 4.1 Release].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find out more take a look at the link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile/releases/tag/4.1-RC2[MicroProfile 4.1-RC2 Release].
```

Author: Done

In the previous versions of MicroProfile Health, there were no unique APIs or endpoints to distinguish the start up status of your microservices. MicroProfile Health 3.1 introduces a new convenient `@Startup` annotation to create your own health check procedures to verify that your microservices have fully initialized. The status of the Startup health checks of your microservices can be viewed with the new REST endpoint `/health/started`. You can now configure the Kubernetes Startup probe with this new endpoint as well. In Open Liberty, you can use the Startup endpoint, `/health/started`, to verify if your deployed applications have started or not.

When deployed application(s) are not started yet, the overall default Startup status will be DOWN, with an empty payload response until all the deployed application(s) have started. A new MicroProfile Config property (`mp.health.default.startup.empty.response=UP`) is available to change the overall default Startup check status to `UP`, during application start up.

> Applications are expected to provide health check procedures by implementing the HealthCheck interface with the @startup, `@Liveness`, or `@readiness` annotations. These are used by Open Liberty to verify the Startup, Liveness, or Readiness of the application, respectively. Add the logic of your health check in the `call()` method, and return the `HealthCheckResponse` object, by using the simple `up()`/`down()` methods from the API:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications are expected to provide health check procedures by implementing the HealthCheck interface with the `@Startup`, `@Liveness`, or `@readiness` annotations. These are used by Open Liberty to verify the respective Startup, Liveness, or Readiness of the application. Add the logic of your health check in the `call()` method, and return the `HealthCheckResponse` object, by using the simple `up()`/`down()` methods from the API:
```

Author: Done

[source, java]
----
**Startup Check**
@Startup
@ApplicationScoped
public class StartupMemUsageCheck implements HealthCheck {
...
    @Override
     public HealthCheckResponse call() {
       ...
       if (getMemUsage() < 0.95) {
           return HealthCheckResponse.up("memUsage");
       }
       return HealthCheckResponse.down("memUsage");
       ...
     }
}
----

To view the status of each health check, accessthe `http://<hostname>:<port>/health/started` endpoint.

To enable the new beta features in your app, add them to your `server.xml`:

[source, xml]
----
<feature>mpHealth-3.1</feature>
----

To find out more viist:

> * link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-health/releases/tag/3.1-RC1[MicroProfile Health Check 3.1 Release Page]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-health/releases/tag/3.1[MicroProfile Health Check 3.1 Release Page]
```

Author: Done

> * link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-health/blob/master/spec/src/main/asciidoc/release_notes.asciidoc[Release Notes]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-health/blob/3.1/spec/src/main/asciidoc/release_notes.asciidoc[Release Notes]
```

Author: Done

The new options can be used in the bootstrap.properties file:

[source, java]
----
com.ibm.ws.logging.message.format=tbasic
com.ibm.ws.logging.console.format=tbasic
com.ibm.ws.logging.trace.format=tbasic
----

You can also change the format by editing the server.env and adding the following lines:

[source, java]
----
WLP_LOGGING_MESSAGE_FORMAT=TBASIC
WLP_LOGGING_CONSOLE_FORMAT=TBASIC
----

TBASIC Logs Example:

[source, java]
----
[24/03/21 15:04:10:331 EDT] 00000001 FrameworkMana A   CWWKE0001I: The server defaultServer has been launched.
[24/03/21 15:04:11:338 EDT] 00000001 FrameworkMana I   CWWKE0002I: The kernel started after 1.177 seconds
[24/03/21 15:04:11:465 EDT] 0000003e FeatureManage I   CWWKF0007I: Feature update started.
[24/03/21 15:04:11:635 EDT] 00000033 DropinMonitor A   CWWKZ0058I: Monitoring dropins for applications.
----

[#staleConnectionID]

> === Customizing Stale Connection Identification

Reviewer: This section needs to be a bit clearer about what the "new" function is. `identifyException` is already a GA config element - https://openliberty.io/docs/21.0.0.6/reference/config/identifyException.html

Author: Seems like Nathan will be out all week this week.

Reviewer: we should try to follow up with someone else then

Configure one or more `<identifyException>` subelements under `<dataSource>` to provide the `SQLException` identification detail.

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>jdbc-4.2</feature>
  <feature>jndi-1.0</feature>
  ... other features
</featureManager>

<dataSource id="DefaultDataSource" jndiName="jdbc/myDataSource">
    <jdbcDriver libraryRef="myJDBCLib"/>
    <properties databaseName="TESTDB" serverName="localhost" portNumber="1234"/>
    <!-- identify the following as stale connections, -->
    <identifyException sqlState="08000" as="StaleConnection"/>
    <identifyException errorCode="2468" as="StaleConnection"/>
    <!-- remove built-in identification of SQL state S1000 -->
    <identifyException sqlState="S1000" as="None"/>
</dataSource>

<library id="myJDBCLib">
    <file name="C:/drivers/some-jdbc-driver.jar"/>
</library>
----

You can find out more on link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/reference/config/identifyException.html[Open Liberty Docs site].

[#JEE9.1]
=== Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features

> Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features are included in this beta release in the all beta zip file, but not the Jakarta EE 9 beta zip file. The 9.1 features are duplicates of the Jakarta EE 9.0 convenience features. In the future the 9.0 convenience features will be removed and only the 9.1 ones will remain. Users of the Jakarta EE 9 convenience features should look to transition to use 9.1 in preparation of 9.0 being removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jakarta EE 9.1 convenience features are included in this beta release in the "all beta" zip file, but not yet in the Jakarta EE 9 beta zip file. The 9.1 features are duplicates of the Jakarta EE 9.0 convenience features. In future, the 9.0 convenience features will be removed and only the 9.1 ones will remain. Users of the Jakarta EE 9 convenience features should look to transition to use 9.1 in preparation of 9.0 being removed.
```

Author: Done
